---
title: Modeling with Mutable Data
pubDate: 2026-01-17
chapter: 3
section: 3
---
- We previously looked at compound data and data abstraction.
- To model stateful objects, we need *mutators* in addition to constructors and selectors.
- A mutator is a procedure that modifies the data object.

## Mutable List Structure
- The primitive mutators for pairs are `set-car!` and `set-cdr!`.
- `(set-car! p x)` changes the `car` of the pair `p`, making it point to `x` instead.
- The old `car` is unreachable garbage. We will see later how Lisp recycles this memory.
- We could implement `cons` in terms of these two procedures in addition to a `get-new-part` procedure.

```scheme
(define (cons x y)
  (let ((new (get-new-pair)))
    (set-car! new x)
    (set-cdr! new y)
    new))
```

*Exercises*: [3.12](../exercises/33/) [3.13](../exercises/33/) [3.14](../exercises/33/)

### Sharing and identity
- Consider `(define x (list 'a 'b))` and `(define z1 (cons x x))`.
- `z1` is a pair whose `car` and `cdr` both point to the same `x`.
- In contrast: `(define z2 (cons (list 'a 'b)) (list 'a 'b))`.
- In `z2`, the two `(a b)` lists are distinct, although the actual symbols are shared.
- Before assignment, we would think `z1` and `z2` were “the same.”
- The sharing is undetectable without mutators on list structure.
- It *is* detectable in our environmental model.
- If we `set-car!` on the `car`, this will change both `a` symbols in `z1` but only the first in `z2`.
- We can use the predicate `eq?` to test for sameness in the sense of identity.
- `(eq? x y)` tests whether `x` and `y` point to the same object.
- We can exploit sharing for good, but it can be dangerous.

*Exercises*: [3.15](../exercises/33/) [3.16](../exercises/33/) [3.17](../exercises/33/) [3.18](../exercises/33/) [3.19](../exercises/33/) 

### Mutation is just assignment
- Earlier we said we can represent pairs purely in terms of procedures:

```scheme
(define (cons x y)
  (lambda (sel)
    (sel x y)))
(define (car p)
  (p (lambda (x y) x)))
(define (cdr p)
  (p (lambda (x y) y)))
```

- The same is true of mutable data. We can implement mutators with procedures and assignment alone:

```scheme
(define (cons x y)
  (define (set-x! v) (set! x v))
  (define (set-y! v) (set! y v))
  (define (dispatch m)
    (cond ((eq? m 'car) x)
          ((eq? m 'cdr) y)
          ((eq? m 'set-car!) set-x!)
          ((eq? m 'set-cdr!) set-y!)
          (else (error "Undefined operation: CONS" m))))
  dispatch)
```

- Assignment and mutation are equipotent: each can be implemented in terms of the other.

*Exercises*: [3.20](../exercises/33/)

## Representing Queues
- The mutators allow us to construct new data structures.
- A *queue* is a sequence in which items are inserted at one end (the rear) and deleted from the other end (the front).
- It is also called a FIFO buffer (first in, first out).
- We define the following operations for data abstraction:
  - a constructor `(make-queue)`,
  - a predicate `(empty-queue? q)`,
  - a selector `(front-queue q)`,
  - two mutators: `(insert-queue! q x)` and `(delete-queue! q)`.
- A simple list representation is inefficient because we have to scan to get to one end.
- Scanning a list takes $\Theta(n)$ operations.
- A simply modification lets us implement all the operations with $\Theta(1)$ time complexity: keep a pointer to the end as well.
- A queue is a pair formed by `cons`ing the front-pointer and the rear-pointer of a normal list.

*Exercises*: [3.21](../exercises/33/) [3.22](../exercises/33/) [3.23](../exercises/33/)

## Representing Tables
- In a one-dimensional table, each value is indexed by one key.
- We can implement it as a simple list of *records*.
- A record is a pair consisting of a key and an associated value.
- The first record in the table is a dummy, and it hold the arbitrarily chosen symbol `'*table*`.
  - If a table was just a pointer to the first actual record, then when we wouldn’t be able to write a mutator to add a record to the front.
  - We would need to change the table to point to the new front, but `set!` on a formal parameter doesn’t work as desired.
  - It would only change the parameter in $E_1$, not the value in the calling environment.
  - We didn’t need to worry about this with sets because a set was a pair of two pointers a therefore we could mutate the `car` and `cdr`—but we couldn’t change the set *itself*, since it  was effectively a pointer to the pair, *copied* on application.
  - We are essentially using a pointer; we are using one cell of the pair. Some schemes provide `box`, `unbox`, and `set-box!` for this purpose.
- The `lookup` procedure returns the value associated with a key in a table, or `false` if it cannot be found.
- It uses `assoc`, which returns the whole record rather than just the associated value.

### Two-dimensional tables
- Two-dimensional tables are indexed by two keys.
- In some cases, we could just use a one dimensional table whose keys are pairs of keys.
- We can implement a two-dimensional table as a one-dimensional table whose values are themselves one-dimensional tables.
- We could just use them like that without any specific procedures. However, insertion with two keys is complex enough to merit a convenient two-dimensional procedure.
- We don’t need to box the subtables. They key of the record serves the purpose of `'*table*`.

### Creating local tables
- With our `lookup` and `insert!` procedures taking the table as an argument, we can manage multiple tables.
- Another approach is to have separate procedures for each table.
- We could use the message-passing style with the `dispatch` procedure that we’ve seen a few times already.
- We could also take the λ-calculus approach: 

```scheme
(define (make-table) (lambda (k) false))
(define (lookup key table) (table key))
(define (insert! key value table)
  (lambda (k)
    (if (eq? k key)
        value
        (table k))))
``` 
 
*Exercises*: [3.24](../exercises/33/) [3.25](../exercises/33/) [3.26](../exercises/33/) [3.27](../exercises/33/)

## A Simulator for Digital Circuits
- Digital circuits are made up of simple elements.
- Networks of these simple elements can have very complex behavior.
- We will design a system to simulator digital logic. This type of program is called an *event-driven simulation*.
- Our computational model is based on the physical components.
  - A *wire* carries a *digital signal*, which is either 0 or 1.
  - A *function box* connects to input wires and output wires.
  - The output signal is delayed by a time that depends on the type of function box.
  - Our primitive function boxes are the *inverter*, *and-gate*, and *or-gate*. Each has its own delay.
  - We construct complex functions by connecting primitives.
  - Multiple outputs are not necessarily generated at the same time.
- We construct wires with `(make-wire)`.
- Evaluating `(define a (make-wire))` and `(define b (make-wire))` followed by `(inverter a b)` connects `a` and `b` with an inverter.
- The primitive functions are our primitive elements; wiring is the means of combination; specifying wiring patterns as procedures is the means of abstraction.

### Primitive function boxes
- The primitives boxes implement “forces” by which changes in the signal of one wire influence the signal of another.
- We have the following operations on wires:
  - `(get-signal wire)` returns the current value of the signal.
  - `(set-signal! wire value)` changes the value of the signal.
  - `(add-action! wire procedure-of-no-arguments)` asserts that the given procedure should be run whenever the signal on the wire changes value.
- The procedure `after-delay` executes a procedure after a given time delay.

*Exercises*: [3.28](../exercises/33/) [3.29](../exercises/33/) [3.26](../exercises/33/) [3.30](../exercises/33/)

### Representing wires
- Our wires will be computational objects each having two local state variables: `signal-value` and `action-procedures`.
- We use the message-passing style as before.
- Wires have time-varying signals and can be incrementally attached to devices. They are a good example of when you need to use a mutable object in the computational model.
- A wire is shared between the devices connected to it. If one changes it, the rest see the change.
- This would be impossible if you didn’t model the wire as an identity, separate from its signal value.

### The agenda
- The only thing left is `after-delay`.
- An *agenda* is a data structure that schedules things to do.
- For an agenda `(define a (make-agenda))`, the operations `(empty-agenda? a)`, `(first-agenda-item a)`, `(remove-first-agenda-item! a)`, and `(current-time a)` are self-explanatory.
- We schedule new items with `(add-to-agenda time action a)`.
- We call the global agenda `the-agenda`.
- The simulation is driven by `propagate`, which executes each item on the agenda in sequence.

### A sample simulation
*Exercises*: [3.31](../exercises/33/)

### Implementing the agenda
- The agenda is a pair: the current time, and a list of *time segments* sorted in increasing order of time.
- A time segment is a pair: a number (the time) and a queue of procedures that are scheduled to run during that time segment.
- To add an action to the agenda, we scan its segments, examining their times. If we find the right time, we add the action to the segment's queue. Otherwise, we create a new segment.
- To remove the first agenda item, we delete the first item in the first queue, and if this makes the queue empty, we delete the first time segment as well.
- Whenever we extract the first item with first-agenda-item, we also update the current time.

*Exercises*: [3.32](../exercises/33/)

## Propagation of Constraints
- We often organize computer programs in one direction: from input to output.
- On the other hand, we often model systems in terms of relations among quantities.
- The equation $dAE = FL$ is not one-directional.
- We will create a language to work in terms of the relations themselves, so that we don’t have to write five procedures.
- The primitive elements are *primitive* constraints.
  - `(adder a b c)` specifies $a+b=c$
  - `(multiplier x y z)` specifies $xy = z$
  - `(constant 3.14 x)` says that the value of `x` must be 3.14.
- The means of combination are constructing *constraint networks* in which constraints are joined by *connectors*.
- The means of abstraction are procedures.

### Using the constraint system
- We create connectors with `(make-connector)`, just like wires.
- We use `(probe "name" connector)`, again just like wires.
- `(set-value! connector value 'user)` assigns a value to the connector, and this information propagates through the network.
- This will give an error if the new value causes a contradiction.
- `(forget-value! connector 'user)` undoes the assignment.

### Implementing the constraint system
- The overall system is simpler than the digital circuit system because there are no propagation delays.
- There are five basic operations on a connector `c`: `(has-value? c)`, `(get-value c)`, `(set-value! c value informant)`, `(forget-value! c retractor)`, and `(connect c constraint)`.
- The procedures `inform-about-value` and `inform-about-no-value` tells the constraint that a connector has (lost) a value.
- Whenever an adder gets a new value, it checks if it has two and can calculate the third.

### Representing connectors
- A connector is a procedural object with local state variables—again, just like a wire.
- Each time the connector’s value is set, it remembers the informant. This could be a constraint, or a symbol like `'user`.
- `for-each-except` is used to notify all other constraints.

*Exercises*: [3.33](../exercises/33/) [3.34](../exercises/33/) [3.35](../exercises/33/) [3.36](../exercises/33/) [3.37](../exercises/33/)
